README.md, before:

# SPLAT: Gene Set Expression Quantification for Spatial Transcriptomics Data

Spatial Pathway Level Analysis Tool (SPLAT) is a computational method for 
quantifying the overall expression of gene sets/pathways. This repository is the official Python implementation of SPLAT.

### Installation
We recommend installing SPLAT in a new Python environment.
```{bash}
git clone https://github.com/ajy25/splat.git
cd splat
pip install .
cd ..
```

### Quick start
SPLAT takes in spatial transcriptomics data and returns a pathway activity score (PAS) for each spot.

Suppose your dataset contains counts for $G$ genes across $N$ spots. You'll need to prepare an $N \times G$ expression `pd.DataFrame`, as well as an $N \times 2$ locations `pd.DataFrame`. The indices of the two DataFrames should match. The locations DataFrame should contain two columns named `x` and `y`.

```{python}
import pandas as pd
from splat import SPLAT

# load data
expression_df: pd.DataFrame = ...
locations_df: pd.DataFrame = ...

# initialize a SPLAT model
model = SPLAT(
    expression_df=expression_df,
    locations_df=locations_df,
    k=20,   # increase k to increase spatial smoothing effect
    normalize_counts_method="normalize-log1p"   # optional, use for raw data
)

# compute pathway activity scores
pas_report = model.compute_pas(
    pathways_dict={
        "example_pathway_1": ["gene1", "gene2", "gene3", ...],
        "example_pathway_2": ["gene4", "gene5", "gene6", ...],
    },
    n_jobs=2        # number of parallel jobs
)
pas_df = pas_report.pas_df()    # returns N by n_pathways df
pas_df.to_csv(...)

# test whether each spot exhibits significantly elevated pathway activity
htest_report = model.htest_elevated_pas(
    pathway="example_pathway_1",
    genes_in_pathway=["gene1", "gene2", "gene3", ...],
    control_size=200,
    n_jobs=8
)
htest_df = htest_report.htest_df() # returns N by 4 df w/ columns 'x', 'y', 'p', 'pas'
htest_df.to_csv(...)
```

Commit message:

enforce gene order permutation test

README.md, after:

# SPLAT: Gene Set Expression Quantification for Spatial Transcriptomics Data

Spatial Pathway Level Analysis Tool (SPLAT) is a computational method for 
quantifying the overall expression of gene sets/pathways. This repository is the official Python implementation of SPLAT.

### Installation
We recommend installing SPLAT in a new Python environment.
```bash
git clone https://github.com/ajy25/splat.git
cd splat
pip install .
cd ..
```

### Quick start
SPLAT processes spatial transcriptomics data along with a user-defined gene set (pathway) and outputs a pathway activity score (PAS) for each spatial spot.

Suppose your spatial transcriptomics dataset contains counts for $G$ genes across $N$ spots. You'll need to prepare an $N \times G$ expression `pd.DataFrame` as well as an $N \times 2$ locations `pd.DataFrame`. The indices of the two DataFrames should match. The locations DataFrame should contain two columns named `x` and `y`.

```python
import pandas as pd
from splat import SPLAT

# load data
expression_df: pd.DataFrame = ...
locations_df: pd.DataFrame = ...

# initialize a SPLAT model
model = SPLAT(
    expression_df=expression_df,
    locations_df=locations_df,
    k=20,   # increase k to increase spatial smoothing effect
    normalize_counts_method="normalize-log1p"   # optional, use for raw data
)

# compute pathway activity scores
pas_report = model.compute_pas(
    pathways_dict={
        "example_pathway_1": ["gene1", "gene2", "gene3", ...],
        "example_pathway_2": ["gene4", "gene5", "gene6", ...],
    },
    n_jobs=2        # number of parallel jobs
)
pas_df = pas_report.pas_df()    # returns N by n_pathways df
pas_df.to_csv(...)

# test whether each spot exhibits significantly elevated pathway activity
htest_report = model.htest_elevated_pas(
    pathway="example_pathway_1",
    genes_in_pathway=["gene1", "gene2", "gene3", ...],
    control_size=200,
    n_jobs=8
)
htest_df = htest_report.htest_df() # returns N by 4 df w/ columns 'x', 'y', 'p', 'pas'
htest_df.to_csv(...)
```
